[[!toc  levels=2]]

As every computer geek, I also have a long history of used computers,
which I publish here, to be able to look back what I used once.

This document also explains the origin of most computer names I have been using.

This site was originally know as **tech.schottelius.org**.

## Servers

### suppe.schottelius.org

First, in 1998, there was **suppe.schottelius.org**. It was my first
webserver, dns-server and mail-server. I recieved it as a gift
from a kindergarten, because it was too slow for them.
The name is derived from the German phrase "suppelte herum",
which means "is still working, but may break if you look at it
too strong".

You actually should have seen it, it consisted of the following hardware:

    Chassis:       Midi-Tower
    Processor:     Intel Pentium 120Mhz
    RAM:           48 MiB (16+16+8+8)
    Harddisk:      2 GiB IDE (PIO mode/16Bit ;)
    NIC:           Some 3Com PCI 10Mbit (3c509?)
    CDROM:         Something like that appeared to be installed
    Floppy         1x3,5" , 2x5,25"

 * Productive use: 2000 - 2003

### bruehe.schottelius.org

Later, in 2003, **suppe** was replaced by **bruehe**. One day, broth ran
into the **bruehe**, and **bruehe** is the German word for broth.

The first version of **bruehe** had the following technical features:

    Chassis:          Midi-Tower
    Processor:        Pentium3 550Mhz
    RAM:              640 MB (256+128+128+128)
    Harddisk (scsi):  3* 4 GB scsi-3 (raid 1, one spare disk)
    Harddisk (ide):   3* 40 GB ide/udma100 (raid 1, one spare disk)
    NIC (lan):        3Com Corporation 3c905 100BaseTX [Boomerang]
    NIC (dmz):        3Com Corporation 3c905 100BaseTX [Boomerang]
    NIC (inet):       Realtek Semiconductor Co., Ltd. RTL-8029(AS)
    NIC (wlan):       Global Sun Technology Inc
    Optical drive:    IDE DVD(+/-, R/RW,RAM) -Burner (old: 32x IDE)
    Floppy:           removed (was: 1x3,5")

Later the one scsi and one ide drive was removed due to problems
with the power supply. And an additional NIC was put into.

At the time **bruehe** was replaced by **creme** (see below) it became
the firewall for the lan at home.

 * Productive use: 2003 - 2006

Bruehe is actually still in use, but only as a table below my desk.

### creme.schottelius.org

Because a customer of me broke a contract, I had to keep
a very nice dual Xeon server back. This one became 
**creme.schottelius.org**. The name comes from "creme de la creme"
which means "one of the best".

    Chassis:       2U
    Processor:     Dual Single core Xeon 2.40 Ghz
    RAM:           1024 MB (2*512)
    Harddisk:      2* 80 GB ide/udma (raid1)
    NIC:           2* Intel(R) PRO/1000
    CDROM:         Slim line IDE 52x DVD

 * Productive use: 2005 - 2008

### tee.schottelius.org

After creme, I bought a smaller 1U server with remote access.
As it is smaller and thinner then creme, it was named tee.
Here are the specs:

    Chassis:       Intel S5000PAL
    Processor:     Quad Core Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5410  @ 2.33GHz
    RAM:           20 GiB (2*2 GiB, 4*4 GiB)
    Harddisk:      2* 500 GB sata (raid1)
    Raid:          ARC-1210 4-Port PCI-Express to SATA RAID Controller
    NIC:           2* Intel 80003ES2LAN (Gigabit)
    CDROM:         Available

 * Productive use: 2008 - now

## Notebooks

### flapp.intern.schottelius.org

Flapp was my first notebook, a Acer Travelmate 524TEV.
Quite a nice machine, bought with the first money I made.

    Processor:       Intel Pentium III 650 Mhz with Speedstep
    Ram:             64MB (max: 512MB)
    HD:              10 GB, UDMA 33: IBM-DJSA-210
    CD:              24x CD / 6x DVD: MATSHITADVD-ROM SR-8175
    USB:             ALi M5237
    Network:         Intel Ethernet Pro 100
    VGA:             ATI 3D Rage P/M Mobility AGP 2x
    PCMCIA:          O2 Micro OZ6933
    IDE:             ALi M5229
    Sound:           ALi 5451
    Touchpad:        Synaptics
    Modem:           Lucent SoftModem Version 3.1.66
    Infrared:        Ali Fast Infrared
    Display:         13.3" TFT


 * Productive use: 1998 - 2003

### scice.intern.schottelius.org

After **flapp** died in 2003 (because tea ran into it), I bought
**scice**. **Scice** is combined of "scientific" and "silence".

Scice has a Transmeta TM5400 processor and no active cooling. It
was produced by ECS under the name of "A530".

    Processor:     Transmeta(tm) Crusoe(tm) Processor TM5600, 600Mhz
    RAM:           128MiB (upgraded to 384MiB later)
    Optical drive: DVD-ROM / CD-RW
    Display:       14" TFT
    Mouse input:   Touchpad
    Other:         4x USB2.0

 * Productive use: 2003 - 2005

### ei.intern.schottelius.org

Unknown time. Was an IBook G3.

    Processor:    Power PC

### hydrogenium.intern.schottelius.org

When the accu of **scice** ended its livetime about one year after
I bought it, I decided to buy a used Compaq Evo N400C.

    Processor:    Pentium III (Coppermine) 850 Mhz
    Display:      12" TFT

 * Productive use: 2005 - 2008

### wasserstoff.intern.schottelius.org

To be more precise, when I bought **hydrogenium**, I also bought
**wasserstoff**, which is also a used Compaq Evo N400C. **Wasserstoff**
is simply there to spend parts, when **hydrogenium** needs to have
them replaced.


### ast.intern.schottelius.org

Pentium 1 notebook. Never really used it productively,
was thought to be a terminal. It also had the alias "alzheimer"
as the main and the bios battery were both broken.

    Processor: Pentium 1, 75 Mhz
    RAM: ?
    HD: 30 GB (yes, not originally and Bios sees only 8 GB ;-)
    Vendor: AST

### denkbrett.intern.schottelius.org

An IBM T60.

    Processor:          Dual Core ..?
    RAM:                3 GiB
    HD:                 80 GB
    Wireless-lan:       Intel(R) PRO/Wireless 3945ABG

 * Productive use: 2007 - 2008

### ikn.intern.schottelius.org

A Lenovo Thinkpad X200. The name is derived from its
main use in ETH Zürich, "Informatikkoordinator Nico".

    Processor:       Dual Core Intel(R) Core(TM)2 Duo CPU     P8400  @ 2.26GHz
    RAM:             4 GiB
    HD:              250 GB SATA
    Graphics card:   Intel Corporation Mobile 4 Series Chipset Integrated Graphics Controller
    Wireless-lan:    Intel Corporation Wireless WiFi Link 5300
    Ethernet:        Intel Corporation 82567LM Gigabit
    Display:         12"

 * Productive use: 2008 - now

### kobold.intern.schottelius.org

An IBM X31 running as wireless access point, router,
firewall, fileserver (three usb harddrives connected,
running raid5 under the crypt layer) and video player.

    Processor:       Intel(R) Pentium(R) M processor 1600MHz
    RAM:             1 GiB
    HD:              40 GB
    Graphics card:   ATI Radeon Mobility M6 LY (AGP)
    Wireless-lan:    Atheros AR5212 802.11abg
    Ethernet:        Intel Corporation 82540EP Gigabit Ethernet Controller (Mobile)

 * Productive use: 2009 - now

### kr.intern.schottelius.org

A Lenovo Thinkpad X201. The name is an abreviation for
"klapprechner", the German translation for "notebook".

    Processor:       Dual Core Intel(R) Core(TM) i5 CPU M 520  @ 2.40GHz (4 threads)
    RAM:             4 GiB
    HD:              500 GB SATA
    Graphics card:   Intel Corporation Core Processor Integrated Graphics Controller
    Wireless-lan:    Intel Corporation WiFi Link 6000 Series
    Ethernet:        Intel Corporation 82577LM Gigabit Network
    Display:         12", LED backlight

 * Productive use: 2010 - now

## Workstations/Desktops

Systems I used as workstations:

### ozean.intern.schottelius.org

My first own computer was a Pentium 1 bought from Aldi.
Before that I used my father's computer.
The case of that computer was painted blue with
penguins on it by a friend of mine. That case
actually become the case of bruehe later. Currently
I do not even remember the naem I gave that box.

    Processor: Pentium 1, 166 Mhz
    Harddisk: 700 MB + 1 GB SCSI (exchanged the 4 GB IDE HD that came with it)
    RAM: around 16 MiB
    Graphics card: ATI with 2 MiB
    CD-ROM: Single speed SCSI with caddy running at triple speed


    * Productive use: ???? - ~2000

### eiche.intern.schottelius.org

Then my father gave me his old computer for present, which was
named **eiche** (oak in English), because it has a big-tower case.

    Processor:       Intel Pentium IV (mostly running at 80 C)


### buche.intern.schottelius.org

**buche** replaced **eiche** on 2006-06-10, because the mainboard
of **eiche** had some problems with the Promise ide controller.
**buche** should now be the file and backup server for the persons
living in our home.

    Processor:     AMD Athlon(tm) Processor, 800Mhz
    RAM:           1152MiB
    Optical drive: DVD-RAM (CD-RW, DVD+/-R/RW)
    NIC:           3Com Corporation 3c905B 100BaseTX [Cyclone]
    IDE:           2x onboard, 4x on Promise PDC20270 (TX4)
    Other:         4x USB2.0, 4xUSB1.1

    * Productive use: at least in 2007

### dosinux.intern.schottelius.org

Midi tower used for gaming. Name is a combination of "dos on unix",
because I used dosbox to run old games on it.

### grauerstar

Nice workstations from HP, a
[[HP J6000|hpJ6000datasheet.pdf]] featured with
a HPPA processsor. I was running it with both Debian and Gentoo.

    Processor:    Dual PA8600 (PCX-W+), 552 Mhz
    HD:           18 GiB SCSI (SCA)

 * Used: ~2006 - ~2008 (unclear)
 * No real productive use, just played around with it.

### grauerklon

Same machine as grauerstar. Just bought two of them, you never
know how many HPPAs you need, don't you?

## Embedded

### zwerg.schottelius.org

My first embedded device to play around with. Data mostly
copied from www.soekris.com:

    266 Mhz NSC SC1100 single chip processor
    256 Mbyte SDRAM, soldered on board
    4 Mbit BIOS/BOOT Flash
    CompactFLASH Type I/II socket
    UltraDMA-33 interface with 44 pins connector for 2.5" Hard Drive
    3 10/100 Mbit Ethernet ports, RJ-45
    2 Serial ports, DB9 and 10 pins header
    USB 1.1 interface
    Power LED, Activity LED, Error LED
    Mini-PCI type III socket. (t.ex for optional hardware encryption.)
    PCI Slot, right angle 3.3V signaling only, dual PCI slot option planned.
    12 bit general purpose I/O, 20 pins header
    Temperature and voltage monitor
    Hardware watchdog
    Board size 5.2" x 5.7"
    Power using external power supply is 6-20V DC, max 15 Watt
    Option for 5V supply using internal connector
    Operating temperature 0-60 °C


### katze.schottelius.org

After a flash  of  lightning, zwerg died and was replaced by katze,
a Soekris Net5501. Data again mostly copied and edited from Soekris.com:

    500 Mhz AMD Geode LX single chip processor with CS5536 companion chip
    512 Mbyte DDR-SDRAM, soldered on board
    4 Mbit BIOS/BOOT Flash
    CompactFLASH Type I/II socket.
    UltraDMA-100 interface with 44 pins connector for 2.5" Hard Drive
    Serial ATA 1.0 interface for Hard Drive, with +5V and +12V power header
    1-4 VIA VT6105M 10/100 Mbit Auto MDIX Ethernet ports, RJ-45, protected to 700W/40A Surge
    2 Serial ports, DB9 and 10 pins internal header
    USB 2.0 interface, one internal, one external port
    Power LED, Disk LED, Error LED, Network LED's
    Mini-PCI type III socket. (for t.ex. hardware encryption or wireless controller)
    PCI Slot, right angle 3.3V signaling only, dual PCI slot option
    12 bit general purpose I/O, 20 pins header
    Temperature and voltage monitor
    Hardware watchdog
    Board size 6.3" x 6.5"
    Power using external power supply is 6-25V DC, max 20 Watt, protected with TVS
    Option for 5V supply using internal connector
    Operating temperature 0-60 °C


[[!tag net schottelius unix]]
