[[!meta title="How to inform people about better solutions?"]]

I'm wondering how to handle the following social-political-technial
situation and would be interested in your opinion!

## Situation

Imagine you are an expert in some topic, let's use knitting for the
example. Further assume you read posts in a lot of different
knitting techniques forums.
There is one specific forum driven by a specific
knitting needle manufacturer, in which a lot of newbies post into
and hope to do some good knitting with the manufacturers knitting needles.

## The problem

Now, as you are the expert, you are aware that the knitting needles
produced by this manufacturer are obsolete and contain bugs that
makes knitting way more difficult than it needs to be.
But you know there is a different product out there that does the
job way better and costs the same.

Now you feel responsible to let those newbies know about the better
knitting needles, but **how would you tell them?**

### Posting to the forum

Posting to that specific forum that there are better knitting needles 
out there more than once may be seen as an abuse of the forum, because it's
still driven by the obsolete manufacturer.

### Posting to individuals

Replying to an individual when a question was asked within a forum
is usually seen as bad behaviour and may be interpreted by the
manufacturer as a indirect attack.


### What's the best solution?

To me it looks like neither of the two options are good ones.
Thus I'd like to [[hear your proposal to solve this situation|about]].

[[!tag sysadmin unix]]
