[[!meta title="Linux Virtual Machines (overview)"]]

This document is ***WORK IN PROGRESS***

## Introduction

This article tries to summarise Linux Virtual Machine
methods and is in its early stage.


## Raw import of notes

The following notes I made some months ago, which will
be the basis for this article.


Try all of them and handle them via creature!

status
------
eth: ip addresses / mac / dhcp


vmware
-------
different host os


lxc
---
Not completly isolated. Linux only. Many changes to the guest os.
Some scripts existent (lxc-debian, lxc-fedora). The latter does
not work on debian.

lxc-debian mit cache (schlau)
no real hypervisor existent.

mac / ipv4 management missing => creature

adjust init. change dev. do not run udev (why?)

Root open in the filesystem. Nice. Quota?

Ressources are shared, if nothing else is specified.
   => network = all!

First installation - than virtualisation!

openvz
------
templates
/vz/template/osname/osversion/vz-addons/

http://wiki.openvz.org/Introduction_to_virtualization

vserver
-------
http://linux-vserver.org/

virtualbox
----------

xen
---
different host kernel

kvm
---
mac address,
ip address => dhcp???


user-mode-linux
---------------


libvirt
-------
broken many many times.

Bootstrapping
-------------
how tos
different methods
which way for which vm-type

Network
-------
Always dhcp? Either on the vm-host or external.
Reason: Easy to configure. Scales dynamically.

How to handle bridges etc.? Independent of the os?
Reuse OS


[[!tag net unix]]
